Azure Service Bus v5 upgrade guide (#6980)
Particular/docs.particular.net: transports/upgrades/asbs-4to5.md

    Sales -->|ForwardsTo| SalesQueue;
```

#### Least-privilege

Events subscribing and unsubscribing requires manage rights because entire subscriptions need to be created or deleted. It is possible to run those scenarios with least-privilege access by deploying the necessary subscriptions as part of the endpoint deployment by either starting briefly with installers enabled, use the provided tool or any other infrastructure as a service tool like Bicep, Terraform or Pulumi.

### Migration topology

The migration topology is a hybrid topology design that allows to transition from the previously used topology event by event to the topic per event type topology without having to go through a big bang migration process.

The migration topology should be used used by endpoints that require being backwards compatible with endpoints using the previous topology.

In this topology every event type must be explicitly mapped by marking it as "to be migrated" or "migrated". All yet to be migrated events will be published or subscribed in the backward compatible way. All migrated events will be published or subscribed according to the topic per event type topology.

> ### Least-privilege

Author: ```suggestion
####  Least-privilege
```

---
title: Azure Service Bus Transport Upgrade Version 4 to 5
summary: Migration instructions on how to upgrade the Azure Service Bus transport from version 4 to 5
reviewed: 2025-02-07
component: ASBS
related:
 - transports/azure-service-bus
isUpgradeGuide: true
upgradeGuideCoreVersions:
 - 8
 - 9
---

Upgrading from Azure Service Bus transport version 4 to version 5 is a major upgrade and requires careful planning. Read the entire upgrade guide before beginning the upgrade process.

Version 5 of the transport introduces the concept of choosing a topic topology. The following two topologies are supported:

- Migration topology
- Topic per event type topology

The topology selection must be explicitly passed into the constructor of the transport when the transport is being created.

## Topologies

> ### Topic per Event Type Topology

Reviewer: I don't think we need all caps in the title

```suggestion
### Topic-per-event type topology
```

This topology is the default and preferred choice for new endpoints that do not require backward compatibility with previous versions of the transport. It optimizes event routing, reduces filter overhead, aligns with industry best practices, and improves observability in the event routing path.

The topology represents each event as its own topic. Subscribers add their subscription with forwarding enabled under the topic of the events they are interested in. These subscriptions do not require any filtering rules.

```mermaid
flowchart TD;
    Orders -->|Publishes|OrderAccepted;
    Shipping --> ShippingSubscription -->|Subscribes| OrderAccepted;
    Shipping -->|ForwardsTo| ShippingQueue;
    Sales --> SalesSubscription -->|Subscribes| OrderAccepted;
    Sales -->|ForwardsTo| SalesQueue;
```

#### Least-privilege

> Subscribing and unsubscribing to events require manage rights because entire subscriptions need to be created or deleted. It is possible to run these scenarios with least-privilege access by deploying the necessary subscriptions as part of the endpoint deployment. This can be done by briefly enabling installers, using the [provided tool](/transports/azure-service-bus/operational-scripting.md), or utilizing infrastructure-as-code tools like Bicep, Terraform, or Pulumi.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subscribing and unsubscribing to events requires management rights to the Azure Service Bus namespace because subscriptions need to be created or deleted. It is possible to run the transport with least-privilege access by deploying the necessary subscriptions as part of the endpoint deployment. This can be done by briefly enabling installers, using the [provided tool](/transports/azure-service-bus/operational-scripting.md), or utilizing infrastructure-as-code tools such as Bicep, Terraform, or Pulumi.
```

### Migration topology

The migration topology is a hybrid design that allows transitioning from the previously used topology to the topic-per-event-type topology on an event-by-event basis, avoiding the need for a big-bang migration process.

The migration topology should be used by endpoints that require backward compatibility with endpoints using the previous topology.

> In this topology, each event type must be explicitly mapped as either "to be migrated" or "migrated". Events yet to be migrated will be published or subscribed in the backward-compatible way, while migrated events will follow the topic-per-event-type topology.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this topology, each event type must be explicitly mapped as either "to be migrated" or "migrated". Events yet to be migrated are published or subscribed in the backward-compatible way, while migrated events follow the topic-per-event-type topology.
```

#### Least-privilege

> Subscribing and unsubscribing to a "to be migrated" event at runtime is supported even when connected endpoints do not have manage rights. This ensures that the migration topology remains backward-compatible from a privilege mode perspective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subscribing and unsubscribing to a "to be migrated" event at runtime is supported even when connected endpoints do not have management rights to the Azure Service Bus namespace. This ensures that the migration topology remains backward-compatible from a privilege mode perspective.
```

For migrated events, subscribing and unsubscribing require manage rights since entire subscriptions need to be created or deleted. These scenarios can be executed with least-privilege access by deploying the necessary subscriptions during the endpoint deployment using the [provided tool](/transports/azure-service-bus/operational-scripting.md) or infrastructure-as-code tools like Bicep, Terraform, or Pulumi.

## Migrating existing endpoints

> While it is possible to migrate events individually, it is currently not supported to partially migrate parts of the topology for a single event. This means that when an event is migrated, both the publisher and all subscribers must migrate together. If a partial migration approach is necessary, be sure to reach out to support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While it is possible to migrate events individually, it is currently not supported to partially migrate a delivery path of a single event. This means that when an event is migrated, both the publisher and all the subscribers must migrate in one step. If a partial migration approach is necessary, be sure to reach out to support.
```

```csharp
var topology = TopicTopology.Default;
```

The `Subscriber3` configuration would for a period of time look like

```csharp
var topology = TopicTopology.MigrateFromSingleDefaultTopic();
topology.EventToMigrate<Event2>();
topology.EventToMigrate<Event3>();
```

until `Publisher1` switches `Event2` to be published in the new way

```csharp
var topology = TopicTopology.MigrateFromSingleDefaultTopic();
topology.MigratedPublishedEvent<Event1>();
topology.MigratedPublishedEvent<Event2>();
```

or directly using the topic per event type topology since it only ever publishes to Event1 and Event2 now in the new way.

```csharp
var topology = TopicTopology.Default;
```

### Order of migration

Generally, it does not matter whether the publisher or the subscriber is upgraded first, as long as the migration topology settings align with the subscribers' requirements. If a publisher is upgraded before all subscribers, it must be configured to publish events in a backward-compatible way. If the subscribers are upgraded first, they must subscribe to events in a backward-compatible way.

> When switching an event to the new topic-per-event-type approach, the publisher and all subscribers must be upgraded together. Using the [provided tool](/transports/azure-service-bus/operational-scripting.md) or infrastructure-as-code tools like Bicep, Terraform, or Pulumi, it is possible to set up the topic for a specific event, including all forwarding subscriptions, before rolling out the publisher update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When switching an event to the new topic-per-event-type approach, the publisher and all subscribers must be upgraded together. Using the [provided tool](/transports/azure-service-bus/operational-scripting.md) or infrastructure-as-code tools such as Bicep, Terraform, or Pulumi, it is possible to set up the topic for a specific event, including all forwarding subscriptions, before rolling out the publisher update.
```
